---
layout: post
title: Bash
status: draft
category: Code
tags:
  - Bash
---

A script file needs to be executable:
- `chmod u+x scriptname` executable for the user
- `chmod a+x scriptname` executable for everyone
- use `-x` instead of `+x` to remove the executable flag

In the first line it should contain a shebang (`#!`) indicating the script language:
```shell
#!/bin/bash
```
or
```shell
#!/usr/bin/env bash
```

## Comments
Comments start with the pound symbol:
```shell
# This is a comment
echo "Hello" # and this is another one
```

## Script arguments

- Script name: `$0`
- Number of arguments: `$#`
- Arguments: `${1}` ... `${n}`
- Arguments with default value (using `:-` operator): `${n:-value}`
- All arguments as a list: `$*`
- All arguments as a list: `$@`

`$?` contains the exit status of the last invocation.

## Fire And Forget

If a command is terminated by the control operator ‘&’, the shell executes the command asynchronously in a subshell.
This is known as executing the command in the background, and these are referred to as asynchronous commands.
```shell
command &
```


## Exit status

Every script and function returns the status code of the last executed instruction. That numeric value is:
 - `0` the code completed successfully
 - `1..255` error code to signal a problem

It can also be returned explicitly with:
- `return code` finish the current function and continue the execution of the next instruction in the calling script 
- `exit code` finish the execution of the current shell

# Variable

There cannot be a space before the equal `=` symbol, or it will be interpreted as a function call!

In general, when using variables favor both, quotes and curly brackets:
1. `echo variable_name`
1. `echo $variable_name # nicer`
1. `echo "${variable_name}other text here" # the nicest`

## DECLARE ??? (SET, UNSET, ENV)
### CONSTANTS
### INTEGERS
### ARRAYS (and ASSOCIATIVE ARRAYS)
### FUNCTIONS
### EXPORT

## Function local

```shell
f() {
  local name=value  
}
```

## Local

```shell
name=value
```

## Just for the call

```shell
name=value command arg1 arg2
```

## Session

```shell
export name=value
```

## Prompt user

Prompt the user with echo:
```shell
read -p "Enter a value:" variable_name
```

Prompt the user without echo (silent):
```shell
read -sp "Enter a value:" variable_name
```

## Value checks

- Numbers: `-eq`, `-lt`, `-gt` 
- Strings: `==` (just `=` can also be used), `!=`, `=~` (regex check)

When writing direct checks (no `if`, `while`, etc) we need `[]` or `[[]]`, except for regex checks (`=~` and `==` with path style) that can only be used with `[[]]`.
These brackets need to be surrounded by spaces!

# TEST !!! (`test` or `[[` or `[` or `((` ))

Existence tests:
- `-f` file
- `-d` directory
- `-L` symbolic link
- `-e` any of the above
 
Permission tests:
- `-r` read
- `-w` write
- `-x` execute
- `-s` user + s(pecial) (SUID bit)
- `-g` group + s(pecial) (SGID bit)
- `-k` other + t(sticky) (sticky bit)

# Quick logic

- `&&` will execute the second argument if the first one succeeds (AND)
- `||` will execute the second argument if the first one fails (OR)

# IF

```shell
if [ check ] ; then
  ...
fi
```

```shell
if [ check ] ; then
  ...
else
  ...
fi
```

```shell
if [ check ] ; then
  ...
elif [ check ] ; then
  ...
else
  ...
fi
```

For oneliners an extra `;` is needed after every command. 

```shell
if [ check ] ; then  ... ; fi
```

## AND / OR

```shell
if [ check ] && [ check ] ; then
  ...
fi
```

```shell
if [ check ] || [ check ] ; then
  ...
fi
```

## Modern arithmetic checks

The `$` sign in variable names can be dropped

```shell
if (( numeric_check )); then
    
fi
```


# FOR

```shell
for loop_variable in value_list ; do
  ...
done 
```

## C-style

```shell
for (( init ; check ; inc )) ; do
  ...
done 
```

### Array iteration idiom

```shell
for (( i=0 ; i<${#array[*]} ; i++ )) ; do
  ...
done 
```

# WHILE/UNTIL

```shell
while [ check ] ; do
  ...
done
```

```shell
until [ check ] ; do
  ...
done
```

# BREAK/CONTINUE

# CASE

Matches using _Shell pattern matching_ rules.

```shell
case argument in
  pattern )
    ...
  ;;
  pattern )
    ...
  ;;
  * )
    ...
  ;;
esac
```

```shell
case argument in
  pattern | pattern )
    ...
  ;;
  pattern | pattern | pattern )
    ...
  ;;
  * )
    ...
  ;;
esac
```

# EXEC ???

# Functions

Function definition (should be ahead use):
```shell
function_name() {
  ...
}
```
alternative version
```shell
function function_name() {
  ...
}
```


Function arguments follow the same pattern as the script arguments.

## Management

List of existing functions names: `declare -F`

View function definition: `type function_name`